So we went into hospice. I went down to
the chapel, took the scapular off around
my neck, the rosary from around my neck,
put it on the altar, and said, "Me for
him." And at that moment, I made the
bargain. I said, "Let me have his
disease. Let me have his pain. Let him
live. I've lived a great life." He comes
home on February 18th, 2003. February
18, 2004, I hit a tree, break my neck. I
was in level 7 to 10 pain, sleeping 1
hour a night for 18 years.
>> How's that possible?
>> It I didn't
>> sleeping 1 hour a night. The right side
of my brain literally shut down. So my
level of empathy was pretty low. Left
side of my brain was a machine. It was
like a supercomput.
>> So you were just like a business
terminator effectively.
>> Yeah.
>> During this time 18 years.
>> 18 years.
>> What got you out of it?
[Music]
I would love to begin with the story of
this beautiful, incredible ring that
you're wearing. Yes.
>> You were just telling me about it and
then we rushed over here to get rolling
so that we don't lose the story. Can you
tell us the story of that ring? skiing
one day and um had gone into the woods
um and um caught an edge looking over my
shoulder and hit a tree, broke my neck
and slid 60 ft head first down into a
river in a coma. Um I broke five of my
vertebrae. Um masserated my brace
brachoplexus, disconnected my nerve root
from my left arm from my spinal cord.
Um, and they it took them 2 hours to
extract me from this ravine I was in.
And they medevaced me to a hospital,
gave me last rights on the way. I was in
a coma for 5 days. And a friend of mine
sent me this momento mori ring. He said,
"Remember you will die." And when you
look in Renaissance paintings, there's
always see a skull. That's the concept
of momentto mori. Remember you will die.
With that in mind, every day when you
wear this ring, look at it and ask
yourself, am I spending my time with the
right people doing right things? And if
you're not, run. C
>> can you mention what the Daly Lama told
you in the same vein?
>> Yeah. So, I I asked the question
>> first Daly Lama reference on the podcast
was what do what do how do you react to
people who frighten you? because you
know there's this thing called loving
kindness meditation where you should
find a way to to to to meditate about
those that you fear and and he said well
Mark he said in your heart you need to
find compassion for the journey they're
on because everyone has their own
journey in life
but physically run and he laughed
it's an incredible beautiful idea going
back to the accident I think there was a
crazy detail where the fact that you
were in this frozen river was a
positive, right? Can you talk about
this? Just expand on this insane story.
>> So, I laid in the water and it took them
two hours to get me out of there, but
the water was just running across the
back of my neck.
>> And um as they extracted me, there was a
lot of ice and I had my backpack on.
They couldn't get it off of me. I had
all this ice and snow in there. And it
was that ice and that cold water that
prevented my spinal cord from rupturing
>> cuz I have a quadriplegic injury. In
cases like that, there's often this
event where the spinal column starts the
spinal cord starts swelling and and
there is damage created to the spinal
cord. And it didn't happen for me. Um
when I woke up 5 days later, then I was
getting a sponge bath with a nurse and I
said, "What are you doing?" And he went
running from the room and said, "Oh my
god, he's alive." Um and they had didn't
expect me to to make it. They were very
concerned as to whether or not I would
make it. Um, and then from there it was
this, you know, journey to this day of
trying to figure out who I was and how
to live with the kind of disabilities I
had as a result.
>> I want to talk a lot about that period
of of struggle and exploration, but I
would actually love to begin by setting
the stage with sort of like a a one
minute life story up until that point.
You can set the context of what your
life was like from when you were little
up through then.
>> Grew up on the east side of Detroit. Um
uh my dad was an auto worker. He was a
pattern maker in the pattern making
business and my mom was a nurse
part-time. I'm the oldest of six. Um
there are six of us in seven years. So
um the youngest is seven years younger
than I am. So I'm 69 and Philip is 62,
but there are six of us in there. And we
grew up in a thousand foot house with a
bath, one bathroom. Um, and I slept in a
breezeway um, between um, you could see
the garage and, you know, and in and the
back of the house. And so it was one of
those rough and tumble sort of, you
know, you had to compete for households.
>> Yep. You know, and it was um, with days
when there wasn't any real organized
sports for kids, so we were sent out of
the house and told to come back when the
street lights came on. And so I always
tell people this story of, you know,
privilege. And I I say, you know, when
we walked down the street, we could pick
up 24 25 kids to go play baseball at the
sand lot down the end of the street. And
we stood on the third baseline. We
picked two captains and they picked you.
They picked the teams. And if you didn't
get picked, that meant you weren't good.
There were no participation trophies.
Nobody had to play. And the only way you
got to play was by practicing and
improving your own game. I had this
little cockapoo named Toby who used to
shag flyballs for me when I would hit
them and play, you know, trying to just
learn how to hit better. And when you
got better, you got picked.
>> Wow, what a concept, you know,
meritocracy. And so I grew up in that
kind of neighborhood. We, you know, we
were loose all the time. We had to make
arrangements in the neighborhood to to
be safe and we had fights and we had
friends and um and in that process I
learned that, you know, there is no good
bully and the only way to beat a bully
is to challenge them. And so I was the
one who always defended my brothers from
bullies. Um,
and so take that into my career. I was
an auto worker in the assembly line of
Ford Motor Company when I flunked out of
college. I did rear axle differential
housing on the Mercury Bobcat. Um, and
um, got in a fight with my union
steward. Um, because I changed my work
rules. I moved my stuff around and he
didn't like that. I said, "That's got to
go to the union." I said, "How do I get
your job?" He says, "You need a degree,
kid." So, I looked at my course books,
said, "Here are the classes I could keep
if I actually I passed them. Here are
the ones I could pass if I actually went
to them. Um, and then these are the
other ones I should never take, like
organic chemistry." My mother wanted me
to be a doctor. Ultimately realized
after working on the streets of Detroit
as a paramedic, that I shouldn't be a
doctor. Um, that it wasn't the thing I
wanted to do. And so, I decided to get
an accounting degree because that was
the quickest way to get a degree so I
could become a union steward.
>> Buddy of mine was studying for the
GMATs. I helped him. I have a
photographic memory. He said, "You
should take the exam." I placed high on
the exams and I got all these graduate
schools of business to say, "Hey, why
don't you come and talk to us?" And so I
went around and I went to Cornell. Um,
and they had these great gorges and
water running through the, you know,
these gorgees through the campus. It was
beautiful. It was in the country. Was
very laidback
socially, not very laid-back economic.
I said, "Wow." And you can drink beer
and smoke pot down in the gorgeous. This
is a cool place. I want to go to school
here.
So that's how I went. So I was married
at the time. My wife and I went and we
moved to Ithaca. She worked as a public
health nurse in the hills outside of
Ithaca, which are some of the poorest
Appalachian neighborhoods
um in in America.
Um there's a great book um rural poverty
in America's written about that area.
And she was their angel in the hills um
that took care of them when they were
when they needed when they needed
healthcare coverage. And when I
graduated, I was talking to Wall Street
about doing invest, you know, investment
banking or um I was talking to Mike
Milin at Drexel about junk bond trading
because I was top of my class in
finance. And a friend of mine called me,
said, "You want to start an HMO?" And I
said, "What the hell's an HMO?" And he
sent me this note, though, was a US
healthcare public offering. Um, and I
looked at it and I went, "Wow, that
looks pretty cool." and we went to
Detroit for about a third of the pay I
could have got anywhere else and went to
work in Detroit to start an HMO.
>> Describe what it's like to have a
photographic memory.
>> Scary. It makes you lazy. So when in in
high school when I took my exams, I went
to a public high school. Um all I had to
do is remember what was on the
blackboard and I could just repeat it
>> and I would just write it down. So when
I got to college, I went to the Monteth
program at Wayne State. That's where I
flunked out. was self-study and that was
an absolute disaster for me. There were
no blacks. I remember I had to
recalibrate my learning. Um, and then in
business when people hand me
spreadsheets, I remember them. And when
the cell changes and I view myself as a
forensic scientist looking at
spreadsheets to see which cells were
changed in order to make the numbers
work.
>> Yeah. And I can see it.
>> So it actually glows on the page for me.
or when I'm looking at a printed page
and there's something misprinted, I can
see that word before without reading it.
>> And it's persisted. It's not It hasn't
changed at all.
>> No, it gets a little crowded up here at
times at my age now. I'm just turned 69.
So, you know, every once in a while you
have to get rid of stuff in order to put
new stuff in, but
>> spring cleaning.
>> Yeah.
>> Um maybe you could describe the key
chapters now, starting with the HMO up
through what you're doing now. just
we'll go into each in more detail but
just maybe give us the chapter headings
as you think about them looking back
>> so first company ran out of money in 3
years we're almost out of business had
to learn that you actually need to
implement what you think about not just
think about it
>> um and that's where I developed the
concept of platonists versus
arisatilians
>> right plist plonists are people who
think the great idea communicate it and
consider their job done
>> and then the arisatilians actually have
to translate it into real work
>> and I found that being an arisatilian
far more powerful than being a
platonist.
>> There are a lot of people with great
ideas. Not too many people can actually
make them happen.
>> So that was that chapter. We fixed the
business, turned it around. Ultimately,
it got sold off. I was sitting at home
thinking about what to do next. And New
York Life called me. Um, and that was my
next chapter going to work in a larger
organization to see if I could do what I
did with my first turnaround, which was
the first company I had. I went to work
there. That got sold to Etna. Etna hired
me after they start ran into trouble um
to um help them fix the company. They
were losing a million dollars a day when
I showed up in 2022. Um and we had to
fix that and that took a took us on a
whole journey. and and and so my career
has had one job search which was my
first job search out of out of graduate
school and the rest have been phone
calls of people who I know who have said
hey I got an idea or a problem and if I
if it fit my profile which is to fix
broken things and build new things not
to make the trains run on time um then I
said hey you know I can help you
>> and so all of my jobs after that were
people who reached out to me to ask for
help
>> so when you go into a new situation
let's I want to talk of both fix and
build. Um what is the strategy that
you've developed for fixing something
broken? Like the I'm interested in the
deep details of the steps you go through
when you encounter one. You're in one of
these new situations. You're orienting
yourself up through it being fixed.
>> You have to get down in the mud and
crawl on your belly below the pillbox
slot
>> so you don't get shot. And it's just
literally the work of doing deep deep
thinking. And in the beginning, I can
tell you because I was a group, you
know, MBA out of Cornell and I had all
these brilliant ideas that I knew all
the answers and didn't need a lot of
help. But ultimately over my time, I
found in my career that while I thought
I was right 100% of the time, I'm really
only right about 35% of the time. But
it's just the issue of making a decision
and moving forward. And if you have a
good management process around it, it
will get better as you go along. it will
change because you have to navigate um
the changes in the business model, the
changes in the marketplace. It's a lot
like sailing. You don't sail from one
point to the next. You actually have to
vector because you have the waves and
the wind and the sun um and and you and
and and the topography and you have to
manage that. So just it's just like any
idea. So instead of waiting for all the
perfect information to move forward,
what you do is you develop a hypothesis,
build a process around managing that
hypothesis,
take in the data as you move along and
then ultimately would be a better thing.
And if you look at all the great
innovations in our society, those things
didn't start as the thing that
entrepreneur started with Apple, right?
That those green and orange and yellow
boxes, you probably don't even remember
them. the first PCs aren't what they've
sold and made them successful today. So,
it's about this sort of navigation. And
so, to do it today and when I went to
Oscar, the first 10 weeks, all I did was
do deep dives with everybody in the met
everybody, sat in the room, asked
questions, kept a list, set priorities,
and over that time, what I thought was
lowhanging fruit in the organization
were actually watermelons rolling around
on the floor, and all we had to do is
pick them up and manage them. and and
Josh I remember called Josh Kushner
called me and said I hear you're like in
meetings asking questions when when are
things going to happen. I said Josh I
have screwed up everything this company
has screwed up at least twice myself.
I've broken it all and I know what I I
could walk in here and say do this, do
this, do this, do this, do this and
we'll be just fine. And people will look
at me and go who are you? Cuz you know I
doubled the age average age of the
employee population when I walk in the
building right? Who are you? What what
is an old man in here telling us how to
innovate and create new things?
>> Yeah.
>> And and I said, but what I want to do is
find out where people are and how they
think about it so that I can figure out
how to bring them to a place because I
can't fire everybody. I want to bring
them to a place where they can succeed.
And so and and I said my leadership
philosophy is we are here to help
ordinary people do extraordinary things.
And if we can help them by showing them
then or talk asking questions and
bringing them along, we can we can fix
things. And that's been part of the
story at Oscar.
>> In your experience, do you think that's
that's actually possible at scale that
ordinary people can do extraordinary
things?
>> Yes.
>> How?
>> All they need to do is believe they can
do it.
>> How do you get them to do that?
>> Tell a story about why it matters. So,
one of the first things I said at Oscar
is we are a pirate ship filled with
cannons among Spanish gallions filled
with gold. All we have to do is take
their business.
>> They don't think we can succeed. We're
too small. We have none of the ballots
that they carry around with them about
how they run their business. They won't
go where we will go.
>> And that's how we win.
>> But how do you derive the the why that's
inspiring enough? Like I I'm struck by
how infrequently even a great, smart,
charismatic founder can really
articulate the point of the thing
they're doing.
>> Right. So how do you get one of those
that is not just good but so good it can
galvanize ordinary people to do
extraordinary things.
>> So it starts with just doing the basics
right? It's a lot like um trading in the
markets. It all starts with a tea
account, right? Someone's asset is
another person's liability. And so you
have to show people the connections and
the line of sight instead of looking at
each thing and saying here fix this, fix
this, fix this. And when they start to
see how it all fits together, then
you've recruited everybody into a mental
model about how the world works that we
can share. So you don't spend a lot of
time looking at little things and and
and dealing with them. They're now they
now know the intent of the commander,
the march, and the mission. Then you
start adding on the layers of all the
cool things we can do as a result of
that.
>> Can you teach us about like a cliffnotes
version of the history of US health
insurance? It was started 80 years ago
um as a result of soldiers and and and
and personnel coming back from war and
in that they were worried about wage
inflation. And so they said we can't
have any increases in wages competing
for talent but you can create benefits.
There will be operating expenses that
you can then expense into your business
and it won't be taxable to the
individuals. Health insurance was the
first one. People were worried about a
baby boom. They were worried about all
the support that'll be needed. And so
seven years after that, they started the
Hill Burton Act in 1952 where we built
hospitals in every community in America.
So that when the when everybody started
having babies, we would have places for
these babies to be seen and everybody
would have health insurance. Well, if
you create enormous capacity and you
give people no sensitivity to price by
giving them coverage, you have created a
great inflationary monster. And that's
what's happened in large part. So we now
have employers who buy insurance
for a large group of people providing a
limited range of benefits that on
average control the price of their of
the of that benefit without really
looking at the individual requirements
underneath and what people need. And so
people are stuck with more or less
holding their nose and picking a plan
that works for them even though it's not
something they would otherwise buy if
they had the opportunity to pick it on
their own. One of the things that you
hear all the time is this system is so
octopus-like. Yes. And so complicated
and so entrenched that it's just sort of
feels hopeless
>> that it's bad. Nobody really likes it.
And the ambition to try to change it is
impossible because of the path
dependence that you just described going
back to post World War II. And so the
result is like everyone kind of throws
their arms up. Why? Why could that be
wrong? and what could we maybe do about
fixing this problem that everyone seems
resigned?
>> We need to eliminate employer sponsored
insurance
>> and we need to say we're going to let
individuals buy their own but we need a
marketplace to do that and that's what
the ACA has created is a marketplace
where people can buy my network my
benefit plan for me and my family. Um
now we need to help them understand how
to do that more effectively. It's a lot
like when we went from defined benefit
to defined contribution in pensions.
What should I invest in? How do I
invest? And it's all based on your age
and your risk profile and what you need
to retire in the future. How do we hit
that target? And they use financial
advisors. Our best opportunity is to
have brokers help people understand what
they can pick. The second part is is
that when employers buy insurance, they
buy large networks because they have all
these employees in multiple places.
and they give a range of benefits but
only a few which is sort of fits the
average of the employee.
The economics of large networks are that
they are inversely cost effective. The
larger the network you have the less
stability you have to negotiate better
rates. In the benefits when you give an
average benefit for employees the
employees have to decide which is the
best for them. and they settle for
whatever it is they get and they have to
pay 15% out of pocket. So in a small
group employer, that small group
employer with one pregnancy in a year
will have a double-digit rate increase
every year because of an a blessed
event. So what happens is a lot of those
employees in that employer who didn't
spend that kind of money pay 15% of a
higher sum every year and don't have any
control over their benefits and they get
dissatisfied.
five years running, small group
employers have been paying double-digit
rate increases. They're now just
dropping coverage and saying to their
employees, "Go find your own coverage.
Go to the ACA." Let's make that a more
thoughtful transition. Let's help
employers go to define contribution.
In in the ACA, 75% of all providers are
in the networks of some plan.
All the plans develop narrow networks.
So, from our perspective, it's not about
Oscar membership. It's about membership
being able to pick their doctor and
their hospital in a more price effective
way because it's not an employer buying
a large network. It's a narrow network.
There's narrow networks in every market.
It's designed by market and the benefit
plan designs range from bronze to gold
where I can pick my journey. And so if I
can pick the right plan with my doctor
in my hospital and I can keep it, then
I'm going to be willing to pay for it.
Last year, two out of five Americans
borrowed $74.9 billion to pay their
out-of- pocket cost for healthcare
>> from banks.
>> Crazy,
>> isn't that?
>> What if I get to find contribution from
my employer, what they're paying for me
today, and I buy a plan that suits me at
a better cost for the network and a plan
design that works for my family using a
plan selection tool. Are you going to
have a kid this year? Are you thinking
about building your family? Are you
going to have any surgeries that you
need? You build your plan designed to
support that. You buy it. You have money
left over most often. I can use that to
pay those out-of- pocket costs instead
of going to the bank. Or I can buy
dental and vision, life insurance, or
disability. All of a sudden, it's my
plan. It's my choice. It's what I want,
which Americans have in every other part
of our economy. They buy what they want.
They can see it online. They can make
their own choices. So, that's what we
should do. if I could draft in like the
smartest skeptics or or the ones that
least wanted to have that outcome other
than obviously incumbency that you know
where businesses benefit from this or
something. Um but are there smart
critics that would disagree with you and
if so how?
>> There's a concern that sick people won't
be well taken care of in that system.
It's exactly the opposite. Consumers
when educated can make a good po choice
because it's about them, right? It's not
it's just like medical care. I want my
doctor to take care of me and what I
want to accomplish in my medical care,
not what the person on the front of
Men's Fitness magazine looks like
because I'm never going to be there.
>> I was at one point, but only for a
fleeting moment and then it was gone.
And so this whole idea of having having
the tools to allow people to be educated
and make this choice will and that they
can keep it because it's in their
community and as their circumstances
chance they change they can fund that
plan from another employer they go to or
from the government they can keep that
network and that plan all of a sudden
it's what I want and it's mine.
>> Maybe you can describe like the state of
the union of Oscar today. So just like
describe for those that aren't familiar
with the business, I think people know
like the very broad broad strokes, but
give us just like a a highle summary of
what the business is and looks like and
then we'll talk about, you know,
directions that we will go.
>> We currently cover about 2 million
lives. Um, and they're all ACA members,
Affordable Care Act. They're all people
who in some way, shape, or form need to
have subsidized healthcare that they
otherwise could not afford. We're
expanding to more markets as we speak.
And the idea is to continue to um bring
to them tools that they can use. So we
have a chatbot we're about to launch
that helps people understand their
condition in a deep way. They can talk
to it and get information and go back
and forth with it. Um we have
implemented over 20 almost almost two
dozen um um large language models on the
back end of the business that have
reduced our operating costs. So we've
been able to reduce costs and hold our
prices at a lower place other than what
we would have had we had these bigger um
bigger costs. Um so it's a digital
forward cloudnative platform. First new
platform for health insurance that has
been built since 1972.
So everybody uses the old health edge
platform. I've modified Health Edge
three times in my career and was built
in 72. Everybody has it. Um pretty much
we have our own platform.
Secondly, we have one version of the
truth in data. So we can use large
language models and AI at scale which
has huge advantage for us in the
marketplace. So digital forward working
virtually
AI capabilities on a new platform that
is lower cost than almost anybody else's
allows us to put a very unique product
in the marketplace. So one of our great
products is for diabetes. We actually
have a program where we encourage diabet
diabetics to join us. Counterintuitive
in the insurance industry, asking sick
people who cost $1,600 to $1,700 a month
to join your plan. But we know if we
give them the tools and the capability
and the understanding, they're going to
get better. We're going to get the risk
adjustment for it in the system and
we'll be able to take care of them and
and and not have to rate them up as a
result of what they've been going.
>> Maybe that's a great example. maybe use
like the diabetic plan as an example of
like the flow of funds and how it all
works. Like if I think about the
economics of that product specifically,
it's a great example to like explain a
complicated system around one patient.
>> An uncontrolled diabetic costs about
$1,600 a month. A controlled diabetic
can get down to $900 a month. $700
opportunity.
>> Y
>> you can invest $699 and get a return out
of it
>> per month in that patient to make them
better. So, we put together a set of
tools and capabilities that they can
learn, including wearable glucose
sensors that help them manage that that
care. And because we're digitally
forward and people can make their they
can learn and go at their own course um
and work with their doctor, we attract a
population that's interested in being
better.
>> Three, four times a year now, we submit
to um the government all of our claims.
Y
>> and those all have risk adjustments on
them, the diagnosis codes and treatments
that were given. And then that's all
compared to each each health plan. And
the health plans that have more risk as
a result of that analysis get paid by
the plans who have less risk.
>> We set aside money for risk adjustment
clearance and we do that throughout the
year. We send out money to the
government who then reallocates it to
people who didn't get paid as much as
they should have. And so if you think
about the um the idealized version of
this business not serving 2 million but
20 million customers or more, what does
it look like in the ways that are the
most different from how it looks today?
>> So we think we can serve 125 million
people. So um the last group of insured
business on a group basis is middle
market and small group employers. So
small group employers are under 100,
large group employers or a middle market
up to a thousand. And those people all
buy insured products. They pay a premium
to the insurance company and they get
coverage back. That is a less effective
system because those populations that
they underwrite for those groups are
anywhere from 10 employees to a thousand
employees. And when you compare it to
the um um individual market where we
have 24.2 million people, the ability to
manage risk over larger populations
isn't there for them. So they are
subject to higher rate increases.
There's 79 million of those people.
So we believe that if we offered a defi
an IRA product, individual consumer
health reimbursement account to those
employers, we can reduce their costs and
keep them sustainable over time. We have
an example right in front of us that
works. So 79 million people there. There
are 20 to 30 million gig workers who
can't buy insurance through a group. But
if we create hour banking, the ability
to set aside hourly
rates that you then can aggregate at the
month and buy your policy, that allows
them access to the individual market.
And then there are large employers who
are looking at this as well um that want
to take their first their part-time
workers, but then ultimately over time
more of their workers and put them into
the system. That's another 80 to 100
million lives. So it's a massive market.
If we get everybody to move that way
where every American gets the choice to
pick my network, my benefit plan.
>> Is it fair to summarize it as uh the
journey to a reformed healthcare system?
Sub subinflation, you know, cost growth
uh which I'm sure everyone would would
want to sign up for is will be the
result of personalization and efficiency
and that's and that's the style of plan
and personalization and AI and other
tools on the efficiency side that those
are the two major levers
>> spreading the risk. Yeah.
>> of the of the sicker people in the
population across a larger set of
numbers makes it more effective from a
riskmanagement standpoint.
>> A pregnancy can't blow up your rate next
year,
>> right? Because that gets spread across
all the whole population. The idea is
better risk management
um equalizing the risk across the
population. Um and then secondly having
freedom of choice on what I get and what
I buy. Now there will be limits. It
doesn't mean people can take their their
their defined contribution, put it in
account, and spend it on beer. Um, they
actually have to buy health insurance or
health care in some way, shape, or form.
So, we don't want people taking
unnecessary risks by saying, "Oh, here's
a great pot of gold from my my employer.
I'm going to spend it in a different
way. They have to use it to provide that
benefit." If you do like a like a a
premortem on this attempt to make this 2
million into 120 million and I say you
just have to assume that it doesn't
work. What do you think the most likely
reasons are that it won't work at Oscar
specifically?
>> There's going to be resistance at the
large end employers. They have benefit
staffs of hundreds of people. This
person buys pharmacy. This person buy
dental and they just manage the whole
process. You don't need all those people
when you give the money to the employees
and say, "Hey, go buy your own health
insurance." Um, that's going to be one
resistance. There are consultants that
advise large employers and get paid a
fee every year. That goes away. Um,
brokers who think they're disadvantaged
by it can help us with the employees
picking the right plan. So, we can help
preserve that model for them. And then
there's just going to be the regulation
required to make the changes. So, in
Indiana, we've already made the changes
to allow to occur from the standpoint of
that state. We need it on a national
basis. It was in the original bill that
came out of the house. It was called
choice, which I think is a better name
than IRA because Icarus doesn't sound
>> sounds like Icarus.
>> Yeah. Right. Right. It does. Or icky.
So, but we it's called choice, but that
got pulled out by the Senate because of
the tax effect of HSAs for all those
benefits. But those benefits are being
tax advantage for employers now anyway.
So, it really shouldn't be scored that
way. Um but that's the way they scored
it. So it saved 30 billion so they
pulled it out.
>> I like this concept of um the
battlegrounds or competitive frontiers
within a given industry.
>> Oscar is fighting other people that are
offering other things. Incumbent
solutions, all this kind of stuff. What
are the competitive frontiers? What are
like the places that you win and lose
versus others today?
>> Size has an impact.
>> Yeah.
>> We only have two million people.
>> Yeah. You know at we took care of 54
million people around the world and so
you know that's a different issue but
size has an advantage as well. We have
the a team on this product for these
people every day.
>> That's a subsidiary and most of the
other companies who didn't take the time
to understand it. Some companies are
pulling out of the market because they
use their commercial networks instead of
narrow networks because they didn't
really pay attention to it because they
had their C team on it instead of the A
team. So size has it's a double-edged
sword. We think about this every day. We
innovate against it every day. We know
it could be bigger. We're larger
employer, larger competitors have a lot
of other businesses to pay attention to
like Medicare Advantage. So that's one
set. The other is the regulatory
framework. We have 51 regulators, 50
states and the federal government and we
have to try and react with them all. And
as you see with changing regulation now
by state, it's almost impossible in some
cases to deal with the way these
regulators behave because they're
contradicting one another. Like the
abortion issue, you get penalized as a
national employ as a national carrier.
If Missouri absolutely forbids abortions
and it's an employee who works for an
employer in another state that offers
them, you get penalized. there's a fine
for every case. And so you have all of
these things that you need to navigate
in from a regulatory standpoint. It
would be far better if we just said to
the states, you run your own exchange
and your own markets for your people in
that market. Um, and we'll be able to
make this work across the country. So we
have all of these, you know, interian
warfare going on between the states and
the federal government over how you
spread the cost of this. So that's an
issue. I think the the the third one is
just there are a whole bunch of actors
in the system. So if you look at the way
the economic models are physicians
760,000 or so all work on a cash basis
that's their their accounting model. The
hospital systems and the facilities that
provide healthcare around the country
work on a revenue basis. As long as I
have enough revenue coming in, I can
win. And then you have insurance
companies and pharmaceutical companies
and biomedical research companies and
DME and all these other companies that
work on a margin basis. And so you have
760,000
physicians cash basis. You have 6,900
hospitals and add probably another 6,900
facilities as well. So almost 13,000
that work on a revenue basis. And then
you've got act 1300 insurance companies
and add up all the others that are on a
margin basis and you put those economic
models together. It's a wonder people
get care at all. And so when you look at
that discontinuity, it really should be
the other way around where the
individual buys.
It's my money, not some employer who's
trying to manage a whole group of people
or a small employer who can't manage
their own healthare costs because
they've got so few people. It should be
the individuals saying here's what I
want out of the health care system. And
then ultimately the health care system
will have to align, but those actors are
all going to fight against one another.
And there's a a quote I have have had
under my bladder every day of my working
career that I I'm I'm a fascinated with
um with Renaissance Italy. And it was
Nicolo Makavelli when he wrote you know
to the pr and the prince there's nothing
more dangerous to affect than to
initiate a new order of things because
those who are advantaged by the current
current order have the laws behind them
and experience to continue to support
the way it is and for those who would be
advantaged by the new order of things
really won't embrace it until they
experience it and between the two you
run great danger
>> but you like to live
>> and that's where I've lived I've lived
right in that place my whole career. I
am an iconoclast.
>> What does that mean to you? What does it
mean to you to be an iconoclast?
>> Yeah, you just challenge everything.
Nothing should be remain the same unless
it can stand on its own
>> in that space in that dangerous space
that Mackie describes, how much of a
grenade does AI feel like to you?
Because if I think about if I try to
boil this down to its basics, it's like
>> um when I'm normal and healthy kind of
nothing happens. So typically like you
get older, stuff starts happening or you
know you're young, something happens,
something happens. I have to figure out
what it is with experts with one of the
760,000 doctors or whatever and then I
need to do something about it. And
that's kind of like the value chain or
something
>> increasingly like I've heard stories
about people uh solving very hard
diagnosis problems by themselves with
chat GPT that 15 doctors couldn't solve
and and disintermediating that part of
it. Um obviously there's tremendous
innovation I want to ask you about later
on like the biomedical side and the
biotech side and um self-s served
solutions and screenings and all this
crazy stuff. How much does like AI plus
other technologies
uh represent a grenade?
>> So for a long long time we sort of
deferred to our clinicians and said you
know whatever you think I ought to do
doctor I want to do. And really what we
should understand is that the best
prepared clinicians in the world today
are people who just got out of their
residency. They know all the latest
science. If they were to read two
journal articles every night for a year,
by the time the year passed, they would
be 5 years behind on the latest
literature in healthcare. So how do they
keep up? Particularly for an internist.
I mean, it's almost impossible. And so
this idea of using AI as a way of
gathering information and giving you
insights,
I I always say to people, the mental
model that exists inside your head about
how the world works is the most critical
tool you have. And if you don't
constantly add new information to it and
are not a continual learner, you can't
possibly
know what you need to know to make good
decisions.
and and and and so I I look for two
things in executives, curiosity and
courage. The curiosity to continue to
ask questions and learn more every day
and the courage to act on it when you
have a hypothesis that might be
powerful. And that's where I think that
could help better informed consumers
about how healthcare works and what
their options are is a far better world
than just deferring. And there there are
a lot of times we have cases and I've
been in these situations where a patient
is dying
and the family looks at the doctor out
in the waiting room and they walk in and
go, "What can we do next?" Doctor, the
doctor never really wants to say, "Well,
I think it's time to let this person go,
grandma go." They want to say, "Okay,
well, we could try this or we could do
that." We often get those prior
authorization requests when the patient
is at end of life.
And the reason is is because they're
stuck in the medical industrial complex.
I had to put my son in hospice July
15th, 2002. And it was a horrible
decision to make. I had to give up hope.
I had to say he's no longer curable and
that we just need to wait for him to
die. And he went into his hospice room
and then I found a drug for him. They
came to me and said, you know, your son
has to come out of hospice if you apply
this drug. I said, let's see, dead maybe
living. I think I'll take the maybe
living route. He can go back to his room
and we'll work there. and and and and so
what what we found was is that in
hospice end of life where 60% of your
lifetime costs are spent.
Medicare rules and most rules in most
insurance companies require you to say I
can no longer seek curative services and
I have to give up hope. I have to say
I'm going to die in a certain period of
time and you go at Etna we tried this
and I remember when I brought it into
the into the office and they all looked
at me and said you're going to break
you're going to break the back company
company's back I said let's not require
them to give up hope for curative
services let's allow them not to have to
say they are going to die in a short
period of time and let's just let them
go into hospice early it was amazing it
went from 18% of people being in hospice
before to 75% of people going into
hospice
>> the letters we got from people about how
amazing the final days were and how much
better it was when they weren't hanging
out in a waiting room waiting for a
doctor to tell them what's next and the
costs were 75% lower in end of life. So
changing the rules about how we do these
things AI can help us in these places.
You know, there there are just certain
things that are just not going to end
well.
And as my eastern belief system says, we
just change our form and go to a
different place as a result of death.
It's not the end of your energy and
existence in the universe.
>> How did you arrive at your eastern
belief system?
>> When my son was in in um in the hospital
and needed a bone marrow transplant,
>> what what was happening with your son?
>> My son had T- cell gamma delta lymphoma.
only 34 people, all men, had ever been
diagnosed with it. He was the youngest
at 16. And it had a six-month
end date. He was I was told he's only
live 6 months. And um I said, "Well,
not me." So I quit my job and I took him
around with my wife. We went around to
meet all of these physicians. And there
was this physician, Ava Gynan, at Boston
Children's Hospital. Said, "Dadly
disease. Nobody ever survives this. I've
never seen one. They're so rare. But I
got an idea. If we create graph versus
host disease, which is a bad bone marrow
transplant, it will attack the tea
cells, which are cancerous in your son's
body. If we can kill all the tea cells,
we can kill the cancer. But then he's
going to survive graph versus host
disease where the body goes to war with
the the bone marrow that we put in that
isn't his bone marrow. So finding the
right mismatch happened to be my my my
my brother Peter who's the third in in
the line. John's 11 months behind me.
Peter's 10 months behind John. So you
know we're the Irish triplets 21 months
apart. And Peter was the perfect
mismatch.
So Peter graciously gave up his bone
marrow for Eric. We put Eric into
radiation. We zapped him where he had no
ability to live after his final
radiation period unless he got my
brother's bone marrow. Put the bone
marrow in, killed the cancer. We're
getting ready to go home. Graph versus
host disease hits him. And we're in the
hospital for a year fighting a horrible
scenario. Graph versus host disease. The
skin starts to come off. Your gut
sloughs off. You can't eat. It's just
terrible stuff. And so I'm in the
hospital with I'm living in his room
with him. I'm sleeping in his room. made
him bring a bed in. I am meeting with
the medical team for an hour every
morning going through my Harrison's
immer internal medicine text and sticky
notes. I've got a PubMed and we're
talking to NAH doctors on the website
about his disease and what to do next.
And they tried over and over and over
again to get me to do a do not
resuscitate because they said your son's
just not going to make it. He was not
able to eat. He went from 140 lbs to 80
lbs. He was starving. It It was
horrible. His hair fell out. It was just
a mess. And he was bleeding out his
total body volume of blood every day
through his bowels. He had gra he had
gastric dysplasia. And there were times
when I gave my own blood because we're
the same blood type to help him get the
blood he needed. But he was getting
almost his whole body for weeks and
weeks and weeks. So they came into my
room one into the room one day. We need
to talk to you. He's not going to make
it. We need to put him in hospice. So I
went in and sat down with him and said,
"Eric, game over." He said to me when
when we I said do you want to try this
crazy thing? He goes if you do it with
me. Okay, I'm in. And I went into his
room and I said, "Game over." And we we
did the sorrowful mysteries of the
rosary together. And he went into
hospice and I was meeting with the
medical team that morning. I didn't have
my Harrison's mortal text internal
medicine text or my laptop. And they
said, "Where's your stuff?" And I said,
"None of that works. We're in space that
nobody knows. He's starving. He's
allergic to soy, so he can't give him
intraipids to help him come back.
There's got to be an intraipid somewhere
in the world that's not omega-3 fatty
acid, not soy. And so, one of the
residents runs off and calls her
nutritional professor at at John
Hopkins. He says, "Oh, yeah, there's a
thing called omega then. It's omega-3
fatty acid in Austria." And she comes
back, "I found it. I found one, but it's
not FDA approved.
So, go see the FDA. How can I get my son
this drug? They said, "Well, there's
these three pages you fill out. It's
called a compassionate a single patient
compassionate use exception. Have the
doctors fill it out. Call us and we'll
approve it." They approved it. It was
made by Fzenius.
The Fzenius CEO was in Austria. He
brought it back with him to Boston.
We gave it to my son and four weeks
later his hair started growing back and
his starvation album went from 02 to
four.
and he came home and this was in August.
He came home in um on February 18th of
2003.
Holy His kidneys were damaged. So
he got my left kidney two years later
cuz I had the best match for a kidney.
And they did it laparoscopically by
then. They didn't have to cut you in
half like they used to. They put two
holes up here in a slot down here and
they cut it off and it fell into the
slot and the doctor pulled out of the
slot and I was home the next day. You
know, after that, you know, he he was he
and I used to ride motorcycles together.
We went down to Rolling Thunder and, you
know, doing all sorts of cool stuff and
we're riding around on the bikes one day
and we're sitting at the bar and he
looks at me, he goes, "Dad, why are we
both here?" He came home on February
18th, 2003. I broke my neck on February
18th, 2004. So, we went into hospice. I
went down to the chapel, took the
scapular off around my neck, the rosary
from around my neck, the rosary out of
my pocket, put it on the altar, and
said, "Me for him." And having been
trained by Jesuits in my career,
we were always taught to be of right
mind, to make good decisions, not to
make bargains with God. And at that
moment, I made the bargain. I said, "Let
me have his disease. Let me have his
pain. Let him live. I've lived a great
life." He comes home on February 18th,
2003. February 18, 2004, I hit a tree,
break my neck. And there was a a friend
of mine who was praying for Eric at the
Whailing Wall in Jerusalem. Took his
picture every day, put it in the Wailing
Wall and prayed for him while I was
sick. And he called me and he said,
"How's it going?" I said, "Well, Eric's
doing well. I broke my neck." And I tell
him the story and he goes, "You made a
deal, didn't you? Send me a picture."
And so he started praying for me. He
says, "You're going to be fine." And so
this this whole So we're talking. He
goes, I he goes, you know, Dan, why are
we both still here? Why does this
matter?
And I told him the Neil Degrasse Tyson
thing. I was, you know, out of a
trillion different genetic combinations,
there's only 100 billion people on this
earth. We won the lottery, so let's make
good use of it. I said, but I don't know
what's in it for you, but you can't
screw it up because I'm just spare
parts. And by the way, you can't have
the other kidney until I'm gone.
When I gave him the left kidney, I said
to him, "You have to drink bud longnucks
because that's what it was raised on.
Don't start changing the grease that
runs the machine."
>> This notion of a father saying that his
purpose to be is to be spare parts for
his son.
>> Yeah.
>> Um you told me that when we first talked
and that that like that line got burned
into my brain.
>> We were sitting in this other restaurant
one day. um it was a Gold Rock Diner in
Hartford and we're sitting there and I
we got our helmets on the table and
we're talking and he's a theoretical
physicist. He's talking about the
absence of time and the concept of
physics and I'm talking about the
absence of time in the Hindu belief
system, right? Everything that's ever
happened is happening now. Um we just
too limited in our intelligence to
understand it. We don't see it. We can't
see it. and and we're talking back and
forth on these different concepts and he
goes, "Yeah, but mine's science base." I
said, "Mine mine's too science base."
And there's this father sitting with his
5-year-old at the table next to us and I
get up to leave and he's Eric's already
headed out to the bikes and he grabs my
arm and he goes, "Is this something I
have to look forward to?" And I said,
"Only if you're lucky." So Eric's in the
hospital. He has his bone marrow
transfer. He's he he's radiation. It was
the most frightening thing I ever I had
it. I panicked the first time I went in
room with, you know, 12-in walls and,
you know, they're just and he's wearing
these plates over his lungs to protect
him and they irradiate him with
Hiroshima bomb kind of radiation five
days straight to kill every piece of
bone marrow on his body. Killed it all.
And so he can't survive without it. And
so one day I walk in and he's got this
woman doing raiki therapy on him. and
and she's doing Reiki and and I'm and
he's she's not touching him, right?
They're hovering this energy thing and
um and and he goes, "Dad, this feels
great." And I and I'm sitting on the bed
next to him. I'm going, "I she's not
touching you." He goes, "Dad, it feels
great." So I lay on the bed and she's
she goes, "Would you like to try?" And
so she starts it with me and after about
five minutes, this is too much. So when
I get injured, I'm on seven different
narcotics every day. Everything sounded
like Charlie Brown's mother in the
cartoons when she would talk was always,
"Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa." That's
all I heard. My whole rule world was
that I was so high, but I was still
incredible pain. The drugs didn't touch
the pain. They just let me not care
about it was the way it it worked. And
so I'm like, I I can't do this. Um, I'm
sitting on the side of the freeway in
Hartford in my 740 ILIL getting ready to
run into a bridge abutman police
officers in the middle of the night
because I used to get up in the middle
of night and just drive around like a
madman and I'm trying to get police to
stop me and they never did. But when I'm
sitting on this on the shoulder, they
stop me. They come over and go, "What's
going on?" So, I'm thinking about
running my car to that bridge. And
they're looking I got a brace on my
neck. I got my arms in a thing and and
they go, "What's going on with you?" I
told them the story and they said, "Get
in the car." like they drive me home.
They take the keys. They take my
license. And your spouse can pick this
up tomorrow,
but you're not to drive again. It's too
dangerous. Just let alone whether or not
you're going to hurt yourself, you're
going to hurt somebody else.
So, I was like at wit's end. And so,
this friend of mine says, "You should
try cranial sacral therapy." And I'm
going, "What is that?" And I read about
it and it's, you know, the subtle
manipulation of your bones and your head
and your sacrum to reestablish a rhythm
in your cerebral spinal fluid. And I had
ripped my my dural sheath and all this
sort of stuff with the accident. So
everything was torquing inside of me.
And so I go in, I get on the table and
this woman puts her hands on my head and
on my sac. All of a sudden I she goes,
"Give me just four visits." After four
visits, I started coming off all my
drugs. She got the rhythm because the
cerebral spinal fluid is like a
heartbeat inside of you. It moves up and
down around your spinal cord and your
brain all day long. And if you can
establish that rhythm again, which might
have been distorted by the accident, um
you can be better. And so I'm feeling
better doing that. I start reading, you
know, about the the procedure. And then
this therapist says to me, "You should
try yoga." Because I couldn't run
anymore because I was too unstable. I
said, "Yoga's for for girls." She goes,
"Oh, no." And she said, "Just give me
again, give me four visits. I'll show
you." And she was a yoga teacher. And
like after the first one, I could barely
move the next day after my first, you
know, set of asas. And I started doing
it more. And I was doing it on my own.
And I said, you know, there's more to
this than just the practice, the
physical practice. And so I started
reading about the American Viney Yoga
Institute. And there was this great book
by Leonard Pearl Malter called the heart
and science of yoga and it relates it to
western medicine
and I'm going this really makes sense.
So I started reading the Bhagavad Gita
and the opanads and the pratabayam and
all these other sorts of things and
started to realize this is just rich and
that yoga is not in the United States is
this physical practice but it's actually
understanding the teachings yamas and
nyamas how you treat others and how you
treat yourself there's five of them each
they come into 10 and the first one is
treat others as you would treat as you
would treat yourself written 50,000
years ago not 2,000 years ago. Um and
and you know codified the the ten
commandments
um written 50,000 years ago. And then
there's um the physical practice asa the
movements initiated by breath called
pranayyama. And all of that is to still
the body and the mind in a way where you
can sit in um an extended period of time
meditating. And there are four limbs of
yoga of meditation. So there's eight
total limbs. the the ultimate being sad.
You're one with everything. You move
back to the one. You find the creator.
And it's built on a model of that in the
beginning the the creator
existed and only it existed. And upon
realizing that there was no awareness of
it unless there were others, it unfolded
upon itself to create the world or the
worlds how many there are. so that those
people through a fog could find their
way back to the creator and learn the
lessons of being the one that we're all
just one thing we're all the same. And
so my mantra which is across the back of
my neck is so hum in Sanskrit it means I
am that and everything is me. It's all
just one. Um and if you can keep that in
mind um when you're when you're with
others you and I are are one. And so
it's this model of thinking differently
about your place in the world and what
you do. So then I go to work one day. I
say, "You know what? I think we ought to
do yoga for our employees." And I'm the
president of the company and everybody
sitting the room goes, "Oh, sure, boss.
That's a great idea."
The chief medical officer follows me to
my office and he goes, "You know, this
is voodoo medicine." I said, "Lonnie,
no, it's not. It's not voodoo medicine.
What do I need to do to prove it to
you?" He said we need to do a double
blind study. So we do a bic coastal
double blind study. We have employees
sign up. We had 795 employees sign up by
coastally. We did cortisol levels and
heart rate of variability of all those
employees. Um and it was interesting.
The west coast people were actually more
>> more revved up
>> more revved up than the east coast. And
I don't know if the if the the avocado
prices were up or whatever, but somehow
they're you know they were like more
wigged out than the than the east coast.
And we did 12 weeks of mindfulness
and yoga
classes and Mari my my then partner but
was my wife for a while. Mari was the
teacher and she worked with Gary Crassau
at Mini Yoga and they taught these
classes and after 12 weeks we had and
what we found is that the people in the
highest quintile of stress spent $2,500
more a year on healthcare than the
average employee.
So we put everybody through these
programs. We had them journal and after
12 weeks heart rate, veritability,
cortisol levels dropped 50%.
In this population, they started going
home and having their families do it
with them. I mean all sorts of amazing
things. Our health care costs went down,
not trend. The actual dollar cost went
down 7 and a half% the next year. So I
said, "We got to let every employee do
this. We open it to employees during
work. They got the time off to do it.
You know, go to the classes." And one
day Mari walks in the house and she
hands me
the journals. And she goes, "Okay, Mr.
Big Shot CEO, you ought to read that
journals." I said, "Why?" She goes,
"Because the problem with their stress
is you."
They're working two jobs. They got their
kids on Medicaid because they can't
afford the company's dependent coverage.
They got people on food stamps. They're
calling bill collectors while they're in
break. You're not paying them enough.
So, I read these things and I'm I'm
going, "Wow, they're, you know, I'm the
jerk here." Um, so and I'm now CEO. So,
I bring in my head of human resources,
who I ultimately had to let go, said, "I
want to know who these people are. I
want to know what their life's like, how
much they make, and it was about 12
bucks an hour, and they were 81% were
women. 20% of the kids were on um food
families were on food stamps. 25% of the
kids were in on Medicaid because they
couldn't afford dependent coverage. So,
this is crazy. Here we are, a company
that's come out of being almost out of
business to being profitable. We've got
to do something about it. So, I said to
her, I want to know what we can do for
these employees. I want to raise their
minimum wage.
So, we started in 150 50 cents in
improvements. I said, this is just not
enough. Let's go to 16 bucks.
And the CFO goes, "Oh my god, this could
kill us." We put the 16 bucks in. And
then one of my um other executives came
to me and said, "You know, when you
raise their wages, they're going to
their dependent cost. their their
coverage b on their benefits is going to
change because they're making more money
because we graduated I paid as CEO 65%
of my medical costs premiums and
everything else um where the frontline
employees who were at $12 were paying
like 20%. So um we what we did is we
said okay let's take all these there's
7100 employees why don't we take these
employees and say to them if you are
below 300% of the federal poverty level
we'll have an independent firm
adjudicate that and just say yes or no I
will eliminate all of your out-of-
pocket healthcare costs if you join the
wellness programs that are specific to
your current needs. So, I did this
program. Um, it was $75 million.
Um, the first year I was at the JP
Morgan conference on January 1st,
January 2nd of 2015 and I announced it
in front of 240 of our 340 million
shares and said, "We're going to do
this." I didn't ask the board because he
said, "Well, how did your board let you
do?" I said, "Well, this is one of those
things where you ask for forgiveness and
not for permission." And I just went
ahead and did it. I got applause. Our
employees all of a sudden realized that
we could help one another and we started
doing other thing and I never had to do
another suggestion. We had we doubled
our tuition assistance. We paid back
student loans up to $10,000 a year. We
did dog pet therapy in all of our
offices. And the only time I ever said
no was when we went beyond dogs, cats,
gerbles, and rabbits. Somebody wanted to
bring in mini ponies. I said, "We're not
bringing mini ponies into the building.
that's just not going to happen. Cool
idea, but no. Um, and and then, you
know, it just took off and all of a
sudden we're spending like $125, $130
million more a year and our stock price
goes from $39 a share up to 80 because
we then gave permission for our
employees to care for our members like
we were caring for each other. And my
last five years at Etna were joyful
because I didn't have to tell people to
get to Sandy Hook to help families with
critical incident streies briefing. it
all just happened. We were like a
company on a mission. Um and um and
that's how the Eastern Practices just
changed my company. So if if we were to
turn that amazing story into a directive
to employers, CEOs, let's say, who want
to treat their people the way that you
just described because of it's because
it's the right thing to do and because
actually it's a selfish thing that you
ultimately get a benefit out of it. Um
what would you teach them? What are the
components of doing that? Well,
>> so we so we created a website for them
>> because the spreadsheet would never work
if you put the numbers in.
>> Yeah, it's bad. Not going to be CFO
friendly.
>> Well, the spreadsheet the spreadsheet is
the worst invention ever created for
business, right? Um if if you read the
book, the the terrorism of Excel or
something like that I put in their book.
Um but you know, we've created a tool
that allows us to manipulate numbers on
the page to get the answer we want. And
then we man, we actually managed to it.
We actually create a belief system
that's not real and then we manage to
it. Instead of saying what are the five
risks on this page and this is what we
did on the on the wage thing. Okay,
here's all the hard benefits. Let's take
all the soft benefits. Presenteeism,
better attitude at work, empathy for our
members. Let's put all those on a page
and let's discount them by 90%. And so
when we did that, the the group that we
discounted by 90% added up to the exact
same amount of savings as we had in the
hard savings, which we didn't discount.
And actually what it meant was is that
we were just not seeing far enough. And
then what I said to the team is let's
not work by what the spreadsheet tells
us, but let's ask ourselves what are the
top five risks of making this happen.
let's rank them by priority and let's
stand back as a team and say given this
set of risks do we believe as a
leadership team that we can do this well
and still make money said if we believe
it then it will happen and so that's
what we did and and so we put together a
whole website for employers and I would
get phone calls from all these employers
all over the country saying help me walk
through this help me understand why one
of them was a a family-owned string of
memory centers and they had employed
that were making $12 an hour and they
wanted to raise their wage. They said,
"But you know, we're in the business of
getting reimbursement for people with
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's and it's
hard." And I said, "Well, what's your
biggest cost?" False. Hospitalizations.
How's that caused? Anger, combiveness.
Does it matter how much your employees
know those patients? Well, what do you
mean? Because I worked in an Alzheimer's
ward um with my my mother, one of my
mother. My mother ran a string of
nursing homes. And what I found in
working with them is if you spent the
time to understand how they behaved and
you got them interested to talking about
something they were interested in, you
could find a way into them that would
make them much calmer. You knew how to
talk to them to do it. But I was there
for 3 years in that unit. So I said, if
you kept employees for 3 years and they
were able to help your patients be much
better and reduce falls and anger and
combiveness, would that be worth your
money? And they did it and it worked.
It's not about
what's the data tell us. It's what's
what can how can we understand the data
in a way that allows us to do this
effectively
>> and not break the bank.
>> How long were you in pain after your
injury?
>> I had no pain for a month and then all
of a sudden one night I woke up in the
middle of the night felt like somebody
had set my hand on fire and I went on a
journey that until the end of 2022
I was in level 7 to 10 pain sleeping one
hour a night for 18 years.
How's that possible? It
>> I did it
>> sleeping one hour a night.
>> Yeah. My right side of my I would
literally walk around in my room. The
right side of my brain literally shut
down. So my level of empathy was pretty
low. And the left side of my brain was a
machine.
It just like it was like a supercomput.
So I could look at things and say,
"Okay, we got let's get the group
together. Let's do this." Every morning
I would get the run of the billions of
reserves at Etna
um at 6:30. We would run the reserves
every night and I would get that report
at 6:30. I'd look at it and if I found a
problem, everybody was in my office at
8:00 in the morning to review how we
were going to fix it because every 50
basis points change in that trend was
$980 million of margin.
So that was my my key metric. And so
that's my brain was like that. So you
were just like a business terminator
effectively.
>> Yeah.
>> During this time,
>> 18 years.
>> What got you out of it?
>> So I was getting ready to go to
Switzerland to end my life at at
Dignitas. It's an assisted suicide
organization, but I had to prove I had
intractable pain. Um, and pain that
can't be cured. And so I was sent to a
doctor and the doctor evaluated me and
the doctor said I was going to do it on
February 15th, 2023 was going to be my
death day. Um and um I um I wanted to do
the 18th, but it was a Sunday. Um it was
the day I had the accident. Um but and
so I so I went and this doctor sat down
with me and they did a few tests and
they looked at me and said, "You don't
have intractable pain. You have
neuroplastic pain and we can fix it."
I go, "Here we go again." I mean, I did
seven days in the Hanaman Hospital ICU,
50 milligrams of ketamine an hour IV um
to try and reboot my my system. I had a
great time. Um but and it felt better
for the first month afterwards, but then
came back in a rush.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I said, "Yeah, here we go again."
And uh you know, and I had worked with
Mari to help get her through
how that was going to work. and what the
plans were and all that sort of stuff. I
go, "Okay, well, let's start." So, part
of it was cognitive behavioral therapy
and I had to go back to my childhood and
my con I was not well treated as a child
and um and so I was constantly under
threat assessment
um and threat assessment is the worst
thing you can have when you have chronic
pain because you're always waiting for
one cell to have pain and then all of a
sudden it goes everywhere. And they
said, "And also your 42 pain centers in
your brain have wired together
um from all this chronic pain over the
years. So any touch feels like pain." So
in essence, I was addicted to pain. And
they had done MRIs on baseball hitters
and they said the best baseball hitters,
their visual, cognitive, and motor
cortices light up instantaneously.
There's no latency. That's why they see
the ball in slow motion. That's why they
see how it's moving. That's how they hit
so well. You have a baseball hitter's
brain on pain.
you there's cognitive there's no latency
in your system something touches your
arm you're in pain. So they help me
understand the system then they put me
in transranial magnetic stimulation and
they zap my brain for 30 minutes to
disconnect those pain centers and they
put me in a virtual reality lab with a
helmet and they repattern my brain
>> and it worked.
>> And it worked. I'm now out of pain.
>> How long did that take?
>> It took about six months. Yeah.
And my first reaction was extreme anger.
>> Why?
>> I was so pissed
>> because you had endured it for so long.
And
>> and my it was my brain. It was all pains
in the brain anyway, as you probably
well know that it it it all happens in
here. And um that my brain betrayed me.
I thought I was smart.
And then the second thing I had was
incredible remorse for my lack of
empathy for people and how I treated
people and how callous I could be.
Because when I was in pain, it was like,
I gotta get this done. I don't have a
whole lot of time here to argue with
you. So, let's talk about how we get it
done. I was patient, but I was not
tolerant. And it should be the other way
around. It's okay to be impatient, but
you have to be incredibly tolerant to
get things done effectively. And so, I
was in this like it was like going
through the the 12 steps of um Alcoholic
Anonymous. Then I felt like I needed to
reach out to everybody and apologize to
them and say, "I'm so sorry if I ever
treated you in a way that I didn't
intend." And then I had to start
controlling my emotions because all of a
sudden I had them again. Um, as my
amygdala amygdala dump dumped out. You
know, your amygdala stores all trauma
and it doesn't date stamp it. So it sits
there until you work it out. And and so
once I started doing that, I'm I'm
watching dog commercials. I'm crying.
and go, "What the hell's going on here?"
I had to go through all of these
emotional and physical changes
>> as part of it.
>> During that 18-year period, y
>> you made a ton of money.
>> I did.
>> Talk a little bit about that process.
Your story is so crazy. I mean, one of
these stories is crazy. them together is
is is remarkable. But then the fact that
you also had this like fairly epic run
of business success during this time is
like um it's hard to wrap one's mind
around. Uh I don't know how to formulate
the question other than it's really
interesting to me that during this
period of insane pain and difficulty and
1 hour sleep at night, you were also
somehow like one of the more successful
business people in the country and you
personally made tons of money. How did
that happen? reflect on that for us a
little bit.
>> So, I never worried about the money.
When I was 14 years old, I was working
with my father in his plan. He he was a
foreman in a pattern making plant and I
was painting walls, cleaning bathrooms,
and cutting the lawn and doing all this
sort of stuff. And I was making a dollar
and a quarter an hour. I went to high
school where we had the 7 a.m. to the 12
noon shift. And I was in that shift. I
would catch the bus at 1:30, take it
down to his his operation about 4 miles
away, and I'd go to work and I'd ride
home with him in the evening. And there
was this other guy that worked with me,
Jerry. He was 24. And Jerry was not, you
know, the brightest bulb in the pack.
And and he would work with me, but he I
I was always working circles around him.
I was always So one day, Jerry and I are
having a cigarette out behind the the
shop at lunch. And Jerry lets me know
he's getting $4.25 an hour. So I go into
my dad and I go, "Dad, I mean, I work
circles around this guy. I want a
raise." He goes, "Well, what happens if
I don't give you one?" I said, "I'm
gonna quit." He goes, "Do you have
another job?" I said, "No." He goes,
"Good. You're fired. go home.
So, I go home and we had one of these
tables, the be trussle tables, and you
we have the meal. There's eight of us
around the table and and and and you
know, the meal ends and I go to get up
and my dad goes, "Sit down." Okay. He
goes looks at me, he goes, "Let me tell
you about Jerry. Jerry's got a family.
He's got a daughter and he's got a wife
and he's got a house to pay for." And
so, I'm helping Jerry make his payments
because he has a family to raise. has
responsibilities and he's doing a job as
good as he can and probably not much
better than he's going to be ever be
able to. So, I have an obligation to
Jerry. You You're 14 years old. I know
we take some of your money to help the
family, but you have spending money in
your pocket. I said, I understand. He
goes, so do you get why I'm helping
Jerry and why there's a difference?
Yeah. Were you happy before when you
were making money? I was. Okay. Do you
want your job back? I said, yes. Okay.
You start tomorrow at a dollar an hour.
He cut my pay.
And he said, "This is a very important
lesson for you. Never count anyone
else's money.
Never compare yourself to anyone else on
how much money you have. When you have
it, make sure you share it for people
that need it when you have enough. Never
threaten to quit a job unless you got
another one to go to. It's stupid and
you're going to have a family one day
and that won't work really well for your
family."
The money for me was always something
that I got as a result of doing good
work versus having to have it up front.
As a matter of fact, when I became CEO
of Etna, they didn't change my
compensation. They said, "We don't know
you. We're going to give you a shot for
three years." And I said, "Okay, well,
at the end of three years, I want some I
want you to recognize what I've done."
And I did a lot of good things in that
time. And so I always and I this is my
guidance to most everybody that works
with me. Your salary pays for the bills.
Your bonus pays for the balls and your
stock is never to be touched. It's part
of generational wealth. It's for the
future and to help others. So when I
left at I had three million shares of
stock. I never touched them. And I
didn't expect it to ever be at $28 a
share because I took over. It was $9 a
share,
but it ended up being a lot of money.
And the vast majority of it went into a
foundation called Anahhata, which is the
heart chakra and yoga, where I joyfully
help food banks. I do I do environment,
education, and community sustainability
and I give away close to 12 to 15
million a year doing that. It's a great
way for the federal government not to
get it and for me to use it in ways that
I think are more useful than versus them
having distributed through the tax
system. And so every year I do that same
thing. Whatever I make, I I take a
portion of it, I throw it into the
foundation, and it'll be generational.
my son to daughter. I told them they
both they have a great responsibility to
manage something that'll be
generational. Um but it's not I don't
have yachts and I don't have all those
other sorts of things. As George David
told me when I became first became CEO
George David came over and spent days
with me and he sat down. He said Mark
I'm here to help you. He said okay. He
goes you you got two Sakorski 76s here
at you know how they work. And he
described everything and the redundancy
and everything. He goes you know how I
know that I walk the floor and I'm with
the workers every day. They know me.
Anybody who goes on um Undercover Boss
should be fired by their board of
directors. They know me. And when George
left, he was banged out. And in a
factory, in a in a manufacturing plant,
when you get banged out, that's the
workers banging on their machine. They
never do it for a CEO, but he got banged
out because of what he did for that
company. and he made three times the
total shareholder return that um the guy
at uh General Electric made without
having a book and crowing on TV every
other week. And and so my view of the
the money part was it will come whatever
it is I have a responsibility according
to my dad to share it with others and
make sure I take care of those that
don't have it. But they have
>> money comes naturally as a result of
service.
>> It is. Yeah. The important thing was is
that every day I woke up and I reminded
myself that I had 50,000 families at
Etna that relied on me to be a good
leader and to make sure that what we did
created opportunity for the future and
and in my first company when I started
my first company sister Joyce Deno was
on my board. Sister Joyce Dashiano ran
the Providence Hospital in Detroit. And
Sister Joyce was the ultimate chairwoman
of the Ascension Health System. She
created the um Ascension Health System,
Daughters of Charity, and Sisters of St.
Joseph. And so I went to see her because
we were having a for-profit board and
you know, a third was owned by
management, a third by doctors, third by
hospitals. And I sat down, I said, "I
want to just make you comfortable with
for-profit governance." She goes, "Mark,
we don't need to do this." I said, "Why,
Sister Joyce?" And she goes, "At the
Daughters of Charity, we have one very
important mission. No margin, no
mission.
We don't make money. We can't continue
to serve our people and extend our
services to more people." So, so the
only difference between a for-profit and
a not for-profit that are well-run is
the forprofit pays taxes.
>> I don't. I said this at an investor
conference one day and I got a moan in
the audience and this young lady in the
back stands up and she takes her sweater
jacket off and she turns around she goes
no mar no margin no mission is on the
back of her t-shirt we believe this
>> and so what I tell people at Oscar
because I said we going to grow or are
we going to make money well you know
socialism works until you run out of
other people's money so we have to make
money so we can continue our mission
grow to more markets this other thing
going on with the stock market is a
bunch of people trading with each other
betting on whether whether or not that
company knows what they're doing. And at
Etna
when I had 652% total shareholder return
over eight years and we when we looked
at the underlying only a third of it
related to earnings and twothirds of it
related to the price earnings multiple
or the street's belief in whether or not
the company generates a product that
will consistently be valued by customers
and it will continue to grow. twothirds
of that gain was largely around the PE
um and whether or not we were worth more
we were worth what we were saying we
were going to do and that was driven by
our employees. We created 2,000 new
millionaires when we sold the company at
CBS
>> employees. It's about creating something
that's valued. I've always finished
everything I've started and I made it
valuable and and and how it gets valued
and and the and how people perceive it
is up to them. One of my other sayings
is what other people think of me is none
of my business. It's their fault. They
just don't know. Um and and so this idea
of creating great companies is by
building great teams.
60% of my time spent on people doing
great things,
solving big problems.
>> Before I ask the question of like why
then go to do what you're doing now at
Oscar. Yeah.
>> I'd love you to talk about the
Bridgewater chapter. Yes. This is a this
is a a topic that this audience in
particular will find fascinating. So you
went to run Bridgewwater uh and helped
Dalio sort of like try to transition out
of Bridgewwater.
>> Describe this story for us.
>> So I get a phone call from a guy that I
know Rusty O Kelly um at Russell
Reynolds and he says, you know, I'm on
this assignment and Bridgewwater. Ray
Dalio wants to talk to you. Would you go
see him? I said, wow. But who would not
>> sure
>> want to have a conversation with Ray
Dalio, right? and he's such an iconic
guy. So I go to meet him and we're
having coffee downtown somewhere here
and he says to me, "I got to get out of
here.
I'm I'm approaching, you know, mid70s
and I got to I got to I'm trying to
create a deal where I can go. Um but I
really worry that the company will go to
hell in a hand basket when I'm gone
because I've been at the table every day
and it's been largely me running the
show.
So, I'd like to get the deal structured.
I'd like to create a governance model
that includes more independent
directors. And I'd like to have a
management process in the company that
knows how to run the business while I'm
gone without blowing the place up
because I think they'll just spend
everything if they can if I don't. He's
got the typical entrepreneur founder
kind of thing. If I'm not here, the
place is going to just go to hell in a
hand basket. So, I said, "Sure.
>> Sounds fun."
>> It was It was like literally a week
after I I retired.
>> What year is this? fall of 18. So I join
in February and I'm provisional
as a board member and I start helping
build the committee structure and you
know charters and looking at the bylaws
and working the deal and um and it was
you know
it was it was it was chaotic um to say
the least. Um I mean here's a firm that
by computer trades all this money every
day in 200 liquid markets around the
world. I mean, it's fascinating, right?
As I'm doing that, Ray one day calls me
and says, "You know, I'd really like you
to become chairman of the board. I can't
make this transition as chairman." So, I
became chairman of the company and we
started doing more and more. And we'd
have these marathon negotiating sessions
over his, you know, the exit deal and
all that sort of stuff. And, you know,
there was no detail that was too small
to consider, right? We finalized the
deal at on July 15th at 4:15 a.m.
We got all these people at 4:15 a.m.
It's like, can we just
And I'm on Zoom. I've got a B a bottle
of Papy Van Winkle batch B
>> waiting for me to have a toast. We do we
did we toasted at 4:15 a.m. We got the
deal done and then I'm hanging out in
California. I spent time in the winter
in California in Lagouna Beach and I get
this phone call and Dave McCormack had
decided to run for Senate in
Pennsylvania for reasons I'll never
understand but he wanted to do it. We
had created a co-chair role and so um
for the two of us to go with a co-CEO
job role and he calls me and he goes um
Ray wants to talk to you about being the
CEO of of Ridgewater. And I'm going I I
you know what a I don't want to put in
that kind of time um to because I got to
learn the business. I don't know the
business like other people do. But
there's a young guy near Barda um former
um IDF uh commando and he was um he was
working there as the underling to Dave
McCormack. I said tell you what I'll
ride shotgun with Near until he's ready.
So, we did an 18-month deal and I did
that
and
the the the culture is so
institutionalized in that organization
that causing any changes at the
management process level about how we
work was really difficult. People wanted
to operate the way they always operated.
That was a bit of a struggle. Near
wanted to make the changes as well, but
it was just really the the investors who
run the business and make all the money,
they call the shots and that's how it
works in those places. Um, and you know,
Rey was kind of getting nervous getting
out and he wanted to do other things,
but he didn't want to be too far. And it
was all of those sorts of minations.
Near was ready. I went back to the
board. And then I had been working with
Josh and Mario for three or four years
um the last year, an hour a week, and
they said, "You're not you're not CEO
co-CEO at Bridgewater." I go, "No, I'm
not." And they go, "Well, um, could you
come and run Oscar?"
>> And why did you decide to do it? When I
left Hartford, I I'm digging through
these boxes and I find this um small
flat box of acetates. You know what
acetates are?
>> The projection sheets.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. You know, they have the red
cardboard rim and then they have the
clear sheet and you have words on it or
cartoons. They were from 1991. And I
would do presentations of health reform
and what the future could look like. And
I had these assetates interspersed with
Gary Larson cartoons to prove points
like you know one person playing chess
and the other person playing checkers at
the same table or the one I always liked
was a bunch of nights staying on the
field half of them with the top of their
armor going off. Why do we have to be
skins today? So it was like so typical
of how things get done in the healthare
system in negotiations. And so I looking
through them I'm going oh the human
genome project I talked about it back in
1991. Oh virtual healthcare I talked
about that 1991. Oh my god, individual
market. I'm looking at all these sides
going, "Oh my god, we haven't
accomplished anything
>> in 32 years. We're like not making any
progress here and the system's still
broken and now it's 20%. Back then it
was 14% or 15%.
This isn't going to end well." And the
CVS deal was meant to do with that. Um,
it was to create a presence in every
local market and get people to come in
and have a conversation in the stores
that said, "What is it about your health
that gets in the way of the life you
want to lead?" Because I did work with
IDO with George Blankenship who built
the Tesla dealerships and the uh first
Apple stores. And when we talked to
people, they didn't describe themselves
as a disease state. Like I never say,
I'm a spinal cord injury survivor. Um,
you know, I've got certain deficit. My
handicap went from 12.7 to 21. Um, you
know, I had to have my motorcycles
modified so I could still ride them. Um,
my I can't play the piano like I used
to. I was classically trained. My fish
my fly fishing just I can't tie flies
anymore. I mean, that's my problem with
my health.
>> Yeah.
>> That's what bothers me. And that's what
we found is most people described it as
a barrier to something they wanted to
do.
>> And so, if you could have a conversation
with a diabetic who had pedal neuropathy
and say, "What is it about your feet
that get in the way of the life you want
to lead?" They say, "I can't go to the
senior center anymore and play cards, or
I can't walk to the senior center
anymore and play cards, or I can't take
my grandchildren for a walk in the park
and sit on the bench without my feet
hurting." Well, what if we got your
diabetes under control, and you could do
that again? Now, you found a point of
engagement with a patient or a member
that's far different than saying,
"Here's what a healthy person looks
like. You want to be this."
It ain't happening. Um, and so they give
up. And 41% of the American public
actually has this attitude of my mother
died of sugar. I'm eventually going to
get it. As long as I can live my life
comfortably. When that time comes, I'll
deal with it. They just give up. So, how
can we get people engaged in improving
their life and living the life they want
by helping them be better?
>> And that's what you get to do at Oscar
now.
>> That's what I get to do at Oscar now.
and Oscar's smaller and it's more nimble
and we're like this little pirate ship
floating around among all these Spanish
gallions filled with gold and they just
look at us and go look at that little
company. How will they ever make it? And
most of our most of our class of um
companies that came out when we came out
are all gone and didn't make it and here
we are.
>> How do you know what to do? I like this
idea that the job of the CEO is to know
what to do.
>> How do you know what to do?
>> It starts with the mental heroist stick
in your head.
We all have a model. And I remember
sitting next to Bill Taylor who was
chairman of Sigma at the time and he's
talking about all these people he knows.
I'm going, I will never know this stuff.
How do I get this? I said to him, Bill,
how do you know? He goes, Mark, you have
to have a network. You have to
constantly cultivate that network and
you have to add to your mental heristic
in your brain. And all of a sudden, new
things will happen and you'll say, "Oh
my god, I didn't see this, but now I see
it." And that's how it happens for me. I
constantly educate myself. I remember
Sir Michael Marmmont was coming to
Columbia University and Linda Freed
who's the dean of the public school the
school of public health calls me up and
goes I'd like you to do grand rounds
with sir Michael Marman on social
determinance of health going holy I
don't a noble laureate I'm going to walk
around with him talking about social
determinance of health I had nine months
I crashcoursed it talked to all the
experts and light bulbs went off in my
head going oh my god we're doing this
all wrong and that's when I came up with
the saying which is now into the lexicon
you're zip zip code is far more
important than your genetic code. Where
you live matters more than what you are.
And and that makes a difference. And so
we started building programs around in
the home. We had a 72-y old lady in
Camden, New Jersey, $2.7 million worth
of health care costs in one year. $45 ER
visits in the same year, more than one a
day. So we finally go to her house,
thermostat set at 62 cuz she can't
afford her heating bill. She's got
blankets and and and and sweaters all
over the house to keep herself warm that
are made of her favorite material,
angora.
She's allergic to angora.
Crazy.
Buy her new sweaters, buy her new
blankets. The next year, one year visit.
>> Huh?
>> So, it was just learnings as we learn
more. I said, "We got to do more in the
home. We got to get connected to the
home. We got to be closer to the
customer. We got to make things more
convenient for them."
And we are now able, thank God, for the
pandemic in one way. It taught us how we
could do this all virtually a lot better
than we thought we ever could. I worked
with Andrew Wild down in Tucson who on
his way across the country after
graduating from medical school was going
to San Diego to open a practice. His car
breaks down. It's going to take him 6
months to make the money in order to do
it. So he starts working with the Indian
tribes and learns that oh my god
medicine in this form as an integrative
way is far better. And so he he stayed
there. So I was working with him and he
said, "We don't do virtual healthcare.
We have to put our hands on people."
That changed with the pandemic. Wait a
minute. We can do something different
here. And so I think the pandemic taught
us a lot of things about how we could
virtualize healthcare. Oscar is really a
virtual company. Um we do virtual home
assessments and all sorts of other
things. So can we deploy that at scale
and make it better for everybody?
>> A big part of the answer to the question
is constant curiosity.
>> Constant curiosity.
>> The courage was the other part of this.
Can you define courage? Like what does
courage feel like in your experience?
>> Moving forward without perfect
information. I always tell people 99 out
of 100 people sitting around a table in
a room are looking for somebody else to
make a decision.
And often people search for perfect
information before they make it and then
it's too late. It's a non-decision which
is as bad as anything. So let's make a
decision based on a hypothesis.
So another medical story. I am at a
public health department dinner in
Connecticut. I get food poisoning.
I wake up in the middle of the night and
I am like by myself and I am sick for
three days. I mean really sick. I
finally crawl out of the bathtub where I
just ran the water all day long to keep
me clean. And I went I went and I went
to work and as I'm and I'm and I realize
I got heart palpitations, electrolyte
imbalance. So I I buy smart smart water.
And so I'm drinking Smart Water. And
after about a week, it's getting worse.
So I said to Bev, my assistant, I said,
"Bev, get the nurse from downstairs in
the clinic and have her come up and look
at me." And she comes up and she goes,
"We're going to get an ambulance and
take you over to the medical center." I
said, "You are not backing an ambulance
up to this building and putting the CEO
in it and going off to the medical
center. This will end badly. I can see
the stock price tomorrow. Get my driver
and take me to my doctor." And I have
this doctor, Dan Chilton. Love the man.
Um, family practitioner, general
medicine. And he's, "Doctor, don't do
that." And I call, he call him that
because I used to say, "Well, you know,
when I roll my shoulder back this way,
it hurts." He goes, "Don't do that."
And so I go see him and I walk in, I
tell him the story, he looks at me,
listens to my heart. Um, he looks at the
bottle of water. He walks out. He goes,
"Wait a minute." He comes back with a 16
bottle of Diet Coke. I he says, "Drink
it." And while I'm drinking, he's
yelling at me about how screwed up
insurance companies are and blah blah
blah. Well, I've got you here. And I
drink the whole thing. And And after
about 15 minutes, he goes, "How do you
feel?" I said, "I feel great." "What
happened?" He goes, "Let me listen to
your heart. It's gone. Let's do a quick
EKG. It's great. Go home." He goes,
"Stop. What just happened?" He goes,
"Well, Mark, my last two years of
medical school," my father was the dean
of the medical school at University of
Virginia, and his buddy was at NIH in in
London, and he had a son who wanted to
come to the United States for his last
two years of medical school, and he
offered a swap for you to go um and sit
for me to go and sit in in the UK. So, I
worked in family practice in the United
Kingdom where we don't have all these
machines that go beep and all these
blood tests that tell us all the
answers. It's based on having a good
hypothesis in your brain and knowing how
to test it effectively to decide whether
or not you're on the right track because
we don't have all this stuff. Said, so
you've got one kidney, your electrolyte
balance takes longer to reset,
especially after you have food
poisoning. So that's number one. It
would have been better to get a ringer
lactose to IV um early on had you known
that it would have fixed it a lot
quicker. Two, Smart Water is for
sweating.
You have a bicarbonate problem. You had
a bad gut thing going on. That's a
bicarbonate. There's no bicarbonate in
this. So, you actually making your
electrolyte imbalance worse by drinking
the smart water. There are two sources,
great sources of bicarbonate. There's
Perry. I can't afford it because you
don't pay me enough. And
and and Coke and I brought you a Diet
Coke because you're 20 pounds
overweight. You need to stop. You need
to lose weight. You owe me a buck and a
half. Go home. I was a dollar for the
Coke and I went home.
But he says, "We're taught to understand
our patients deeply, know the science,
do a great history and physical, and
come up with a with a hypothesis and
test it." And that's how I work. I
figure out there's obviously something
wrong. What are the possible possible
ways of moving forward, testing a number
of hypotheses to find out what's truly
wrong and then fixing them?
>> We talked a lot about the worldview
you've adopted through all these
experiences. If I if I rewind all all
the way back to prior to going through
what you went through with your son,
>> like this first crazy chapter and then
of course the subsequent chapter, how do
you think your experience of the world
today is most different than it was
prior to that? Like if if you could sit
down and have lunch with the 2000
version of you, how are you most
different? Like what is it like to
experience the world after having been
through all this craziness? I always
thought when I graduated from the MBA
program at Cornell, that I knew
everything I needed to know about
running a business. And I didn't know
anything about running a business. Um, I
used to go to RUFoffs, which is a bar in
college town, and they have the largest
brain collection at Cornell, and and the
largest brain they had was for Ruof, who
was an axe murderer in the late 1800s,
and um, he killed seven people and got
electrocuted. And they used to take
these brains of criminal minds and try
and see if there was any relationship
between size and shape and bad behavior.
And so they have this underneath the
computer lab at Cornell, they have this
massive brain collection of all these
brains. And somehow Ruoff's brain got
above the cash register in this bar. And
so Thursday nights I would go to Ruofs
and we'd drink beer and party. And
Friday morning was my first was was my
class on um corporate governance and and
and running or and building organization
structures which I slept through most of
the time and you know just wrote a piece
of a paper on it and sent it in and just
got the grade I needed to get out. So I
never learned all I never spent my time
learning all the subtle sciences of
social management of organizations and
had to learn the hard way. And over
time, I used to have this every night, I
get all my material before I go home for
the next day. I review it all and I come
up to a point of view on all of it. So
that when I walk into the meeting, I'm
ready to discuss where we go versus
having somebody read me PowerPoints. And
I tell people, do not read me
PowerPoints. I will stop you. Um, I have
read them. So, let's get going. So, I
always just say, I have the right I
would have the right those were all the
right answers. And how long will it take
the people in the room tomorrow to get
to the same conclusion I know is the
right one? And then I'd start asking
questions to try and steer them to the
right, right? Leading the witness. And
one day, Ron Williams is sitting there
and this is in 2003 before the accident.
He goes, "You know, it's really
interesting the way you operate." He
goes, "It's very transparent to somebody
like me. And I would offer you a
suggestion. Just try it. Those questions
you put together for everybody. Why
don't you actually listen to the answers
instead of preparing the next question
and come up with two more questions as a
result of the answer? you'll be amazed
at how much smarter you are. And now I
know 35% of the time I'm right and the
rest of the time I got to learn by
asking questions. So it changed my style
completely. So I would tell myself in
2000 or the late 1990s
a lot more humility and a lot more
interest in what others think is a far
better solution and you'll get further
along and you'll have support for it
because when you tell people what to do
and you stumble the knives come out and
you have no hope.
What's your unfinished business, if any?
>> I'm going through this debate internally
about, you know, why do I continue to
work? What am I looking for? What am I
trying to find? And I don't know what it
is. I know I'm not afraid of being
alone. I love being alone. I'm an
introvert by nature. Um, you probably
wouldn't recognize it, but I'm very
introverted. Um, I hate large groups.
When I get up in front of large
audiences, I'm sick to my stomach. Um,
it really is trouble for me. And and and
it's not because I'm not confident in
myself. It's just that I'm I'm I don't I
don't feel I need to convince others
that I'm a good person. I know who I am.
My unfinished business is understanding
how I can be much more effective with
what I have than trying to accumulate
more, I guess, would be the And what is
that? I mean, it's my foundation. We're
rebuilding the libraries and the
elementary schools in Harlem. We have
created a reforestation plan for our f
five burrows of New York. Um, and we're
planting trees now. And we're doing all
these amazing things. Harlem Grown was
one little farm and it's now 25 farm
across all from 25 elementary schools in
Harlem helping families eat and learn.
We have students that go to the farms
and work with the children after school
until their parent comes to pick them
up. They get food, go across to the
school, build a meal together, and
review homework instead of watching TV
with fast food. I mean, all really cool
stuff. And I'm really proud of all that
work, but it's I'm like unsatisfied
and I don't know why.
>> What have you learned about enduring
impossibly hard things? Lots of people
have to do this to varying degrees.
Yours is extra extreme and
extraordinary.
>> Yeah.
>> What can you say reflecting on the
totality of it about the endurance of
difficult things?
>> Never waste a good crisis. There's
opportunity in everything that confronts
you. And I would say, and um it was
actually Kino Reeves that said this, um
the challenges that come your way,
um the things that could break you are
really gifts
because they make you a better person.
And I, you know, people that have known
me my whole life, including my my five
buddies that I went to kindergarten,
grade school, high school, and college
with, I still see, they just could never
imagine I would be who I would be, nor
could I. I mean, my role was gonna be
work in the plant, get home by three,
head up to Northern Michigan, um, to a
little place I have up there and hang
out and, um, and and just be a good dad
and, you know, make it and here I am and
I have all these other things and and a
lot of wrinkles along the way that have
been very disappointing and things that
I've done that I not very proud of that
I did and and in the end in in the end
analysis, every one of them has been a
learning opportunity that's made me a
better person. and the person that's
coming out of the other side. What I've
learned is every crisis you face, you
can't go back. You can only go forward.
And you just have to pick up the pieces
and start rebuilding.
>> I've been excited to ask you my final
traditional closing question because
your insane story.
>> What is the kindest thing that anyone's
ever done for you?
>> I've had so many people be so kind to
me. It's really hard to dist distinguish
one thing. When I was in the hospital
with Eric, I mean, it was like a I still
have my They gave me an ID badge um so I
didn't have to go through security every
time and get a a pass to the room. And
um
there was this doctor, Dr. Gynan, who
came up with this treatment. And um
and every time a dark turn would happen,
I get a phone call from her and I didn't
know why. I mean, she was not on the
floor. She was the head of the program.
But I get this call from her and she
said, "I am really I am really hungry.
Would like to share some fries with you
over at the McDonald's at the Longwood
Mall, which was right next to Children's
Hospital. And I used to go over there to
work out um every day. The only time I
left Eric was from 10:00 to 11:00 every
day. I went to the gym to work out and
they would do a sponge bath and all that
other sort of stuff for him. And and she
would sit down with me and say, "You're
an amazing human being.
Here's what I would do next.
Don't let them convince you that he's
dead. Here's what I would do next." It
cost her her job as a head of that
program. and they put her into research
because the hospital tried to take him
away from me because they thought I was
being unrealistically expectant of his
potential. I was halfway to Hartford to
go get my daughter
and the nurse called me and said, "An
attorney, the priest, and the hospital
administrator are in sitting with your
son talking about emancipating him as a
minor
so he can make his own decisions."
I flipped around one of the turnarounds
on the the turnpike and I headed back to
Boston at like a 100 miles an hour
hoping to catch a cop and say, you know,
my son needs me.
Not one cop.
>> What is it these cops in you?
>> Nobody pulled me over. It was like I
would have appreciated the escort is
what I was going to be able to get.
>> I walk in the room, I grab the attorney
and said, "This stops right now. I am
the I'm the adult. he can't apply for it
without my permission.
And I threw them out of the room.
Ava
lost her role as the head of that bone
marrow transplant program largely
because that cost that hospital a lot of
money to have him in the hospital for a
year and a half in an intensive unit.
And they tried to get me to do DNRs.
They tried me to put him into hospice
and they just tried everything. I had a
doctor in the cafeteria one day saying
to me, "Hey, Mr. Berlin, have you
thought any more about that DNR?" I
grabbed him, threw him on the floor, and
next thing I have security all over me.
I go, "How dare you ask me that question
in the middle of a cafeteria? What's
wrong with you?" Ava put herself on the
line for him. And she didn't know him or
me for anything. And she's still an
amazing friend. And if there's any one
accomplishment I could point to is his
he's alive
because of my engagement and my in my
advocacy for him and in in her
partnership in it. That's the kindest
thing that anybody's ever done for me.
>> Mark, your story is crazy, incredible.
I'm so thankful that you chose to tell
it with me uh and for all that you're
building and doing. I'm really
appreciative for your time. Thank you.
>> Thank you so much.